Writable MIB IESG statement + NEMOPS (#29)
IETF-OPSAWG-WG/draft-opsarea-rfc5706bis: draft-opsarea-rfc5706bis.md

#  TO DO LIST

   See the list of open issues at https://github.com/IETF-OPSAWG-WG/draft-opsarea-rfc5706bis/issues

>    On top of that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>       - update the link to the NEMOPS report

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   The operational environment and manageability of the protocol should
   be considered from the start when new protocols are designed.

   As the Internet has grown, IETF protocols have addressed a constantly growing set of
   needs, such as web servers, collaboration services, and applications.
   The number of IETF management technologies has been expanding and the
   IETF management strategy has been changing to address the emerging

>    management requirements.  In the past, most of the existing IETF management 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   management requirements.  In the past, most of the IETF management 
```

>    standards are focused on using Structure of Management Information (SMI)-based 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   standards were focused on using Structure of Management Information (SMI)-based 
```

   data models (MIB modules) to monitor and manage networking devices.  

>    These days, the YANG data modeling language {!RFC7950}} is recommended to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   These days, the YANG data modeling language {?RFC7950}} is recommended to
```

   The operational environment and manageability of the protocol should
   be considered from the start when new protocols are designed.

   As the Internet has grown, IETF protocols have addressed a constantly growing set of
   needs, such as web servers, collaboration services, and applications.
   The number of IETF management technologies has been expanding and the
   IETF management strategy has been changing to address the emerging
   management requirements. In the past, most of the existing IETF management
   standards were focused on using Structure of Management Information (SMI)-based
   data models (MIB modules) to monitor and manage networking devices.

>    These days, the YANG data modeling language {?RFC7950}} is recommended to

Reviewer 2: Maybe "Currently" instead of "These days"

   monitor and manage the IETF protocols and the networking devices.

>    The discussion of emerging sets of management requirements has a long

Reviewer 2: This reads odd.  Maybe, management requirements have evolved over the history of the IETF?

   IESG policy to require working groups to write a MIB module to
   provide manageability for new protocols is being replaced by a policy
   that is more open to using a variety of management protocols and data
   models designed to achieve different goals.  In 2014, the IESG wrote a 
   statement about "Writable MIB Module" 

>    [https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/statement-iesg-writable-mib-module-iesg-statement-20140302/] :

Reviewer: Please transform into a reference:

  IESG-STATEMENT:
    target: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/statement-iesg-writable-mib-module-iesg-statement-20140302/
    title: Writable MIB Module IESG Statement
    author:
    - org: IETF
    date: 2014-03-02

   "The IESG is aware of discussions in the OPS area and in a number of working 
   groups about the current practice for standards-based approaches to configuration.

   The OPS area has shown strong support for the use of NETCONF/YANG while many 
   working groups continue to specify MIB modules for this purpose. The IESG 
   wishes to clarify this situation with this statement:

   - IETF working groups are therefore encouraged to use the NETCONF/YANG 
   standards for configuration, especially in new charters.
   - SNMP MIB modules creating and modifying configuration state should only 
   be produced by working groups in cases of clear utility and consensus to 
   use SNMP write operations for configuration, and in consultation with the 

>    OPS ADs/MIB doctors."

Reviewer: Maybe summarize the main message rather than quoting text?

Author: Done. See the proposal

   In 2006, the IETF discussed whether the Management Framework should
   be updated to accommodate multiple IETF schema languages for
   describing the structure of management information and multiple IETF
   standard protocols for performing management tasks. The IESG asked
   that a document be written to discuss how protocol designers and
   working groups should address management in this emerging multi-
   protocol environment. This document and some planned companion
   documents attempt to provide some guidelines for navigating the
   rapidly shifting operating and management environments.

>    In 2014, the IESG wrote its statement on "Writable MIB Module", as

Reviewer 2: Why not just re-reference (i.e., "{{}}") the workshop?

   mentioned above.

>    In 2024, the IAB hold the "Next Era of Network Management Operations (NEMOPS)"

Reviewer 2: I've added a NEMOPS xref.  Maybe link to the readout here, too?

   documents attempt to provide some guidelines for navigating the
   rapidly shifting operating and management environments.

   In 2014, the IESG wrote its statement on "Writable MIB Module", as
   mentioned above.

   In 2024, the IAB hold the "Next Era of Network Management Operations (NEMOPS)" 

>    workshop, building on the previous 2002 worshop. Since much has changed 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   workshop, building on the previous 2002 IAB workshop. Given that much has changed 
```

   in the Internet’s operation and technological foundations since the first
   worshop, the NEMOPS workshop reviewed the past outcomes and discussed any 
   operational barriers that prevented these technologies from being widely 

>    implemented. With the industry, network operators and protocol engineers 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   implemented. With the industry, network operators, and protocol engineers 
```

>    working in collaboration, the workshop developed a suggested plan of 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   working in collaboration, the workshop developed a proposed plan of action
```

>    action and network management recommendations for the IETF and IRTF. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   and provided network management recommendations for both the IETF and IRTF. 
```

>    The NEMOPS report is currently be created, with the latest version being 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The {{?NEMOPS=I-D.iab-nemops-workshop-report}} report
```

>    at https://intarchboard.github.io/draft-iab-nemops-workshop-report/draft-iab-nemops-workshop-report.html

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>    (TO DO: update with the RFC, once published by the IAB)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
